# Taxes

So it's awesome to make money doing stuff you love, however some people are not
so lucky. That is basically why we pay so much tax in Norway, to help others
that are not as fortunate as yourself.

However we also get a lot back from those taxes as well. For example free health
care, free education, financial security, etc., and thus a more stable society
to live in. Since, you know, you won't lose your house and live on the street by
the first sign of trouble. Yay!

Happy programmer:

![Happy programmer](http://i.imgur.com/sdvL20O.gif)

## Different types of taxes

### Regular tax

Taxes varies between 11 % and 47 % based on your income. There are also some
deductions from this percentage based on your mortgage, number of kids, type of
work, etc.

Have a look at this [table of tax percentages]. Sadly it is only available in
Norwegian, but Google Translate might help you understand it. The first table is
without mortgage loan and the second is with an estimated mortgage of 2 times
your income (a modest loan if you live in Oslo).

[table of tax percentages]: http://www.smartepenger.no/skatt/103-skatt/653-skatteprosenter-pa-lonnsinntekt

Regular taxes are held back and paid in by your employer and is part of an
automatic process strictly regulated by Norwegian accounting principles.

### Payroll tax

**Applies to**: The Employer

**Percentage**: Between 14.1 % and 0 %. 14.1 % for Hyper since our employees are
based in Oslo.

Why should employers have to pay the government to hire you? Basically this
works like an insurance for you as an employee. If you are fired and cannot find
another job in Norway you will still receive a salary for up to 2 years (minimum
of 1 year). The salary is based on your income the last 3 years and is a bit
less than what you usually would earn working.

There are more reasons for employers to pay the payroll tax but we won't go into
them here.

#### Reduced tax in December and July

The Norwegian tax system is based upon 10.5 months of tax. This does not mean
that you pay less tax. It means that you pay a greater portion of your taxes 10
months of the year.

The result is that your salary in July is without taxes and you only pay 50 % of
the usual tax in December. Oh joy! For once, strange bureaucratic rules come in
handy. :)

#### Tax reduction for foreigners

Basically the first 2 years (or less if you start in the middle of a year) of
working in Norway you get a tax reduction (10 % of your gross income) to help
you get settled in (and get used to the high level of taxes here). Here's a good
article [explaining reduction] application process. Welcome to Norway! :)

[explaining reduction]: http://www.skatteetaten.no/en/Person/Tax-Return/Find-item/3/3/7/how-to-change-the-standard-deduction-under-item-3.3.7-for-temporary-stay-in-norway/

### Vacation money (Norwegian: “Feriepenger”)

**Applies to**: Full time employees

**Percentage**: Minimum 10.2 % or more, or 12.5 % for employees of age 60 or
above.

#### The good part

So first of all, this is not a tax. It is accounting law. Vacation money is a
sum of money saved on your behalf by your employer to ensure that you have a
salary that equals your average monthly income during vacation.

This is good because we have so many vacation days in Norway; a minimum of 4
week (counted as 4 × 5 workdays, so 20 work days in total). **At Hyper we are
even luckier and have 5 vacation weeks, i.e. 25 days.**

Given an income of 120,000 NOK we would get 107,760 NOK (120 000 × (1 – 0.102))
paid out directly through the hours that we work. The rest is saved up for us by
our employer and given to us to be used while we are not working (on vacation).
This is usually set to a fixed month, like every June the following year.

So this law ensures that you are paid at least an average monthly income even
though you take vacation during the year.

Exactly how and when this money is paid out is solved differently by employers.
Ask our office manager for more details on how we do this at Hyper.

#### The bad part

Since vacation money is paid out the following year you don't receive them
during your first year for the first full time job in Norway. (However, if you
switch to another Norwegian employer you will receive your vacation money from
your last employer the first year.)

### VAT (“mva”, “merverdiavgift” or “moms” in Norwegian)

So this is the annoying tax that applies to most goods and services that you buy
here in Norway. It's a whopping 25 % for most things. Many other countries apart
from Norway also have this tax.

Transportation only has 8 % VAT, entertainment like theatre performances, books
and magazines may not pay any VAT at all in some circumstances and there are
also other exceptions, but in most cases the 25 % rule applies.

## Damn taxes!

*Or, why can't Norway just spend its oil money already?*

Well … [this is why].

[this is why]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_budgetary_rule

Also, it would just trash the Norwegian economy in so many ways, because
economics …
